- Title: payment-proofs
- Authors: [David Burkett](mailto:davidburkett38@gmail.com)
- Start date: Nov 5, 2019
- RFC PR: [mimblewimble/grin-rfcs#31](https://github.com/mimblewimble/grin-rfcs/pull/31) 
- Tracking issue: [mimblewimble/grin-wallet#230](https://github.com/mimblewimble/grin-wallet/issues/230)
---

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

Support generating and validating payment proofs for sender-initiated (i.e. non-invoice) transactions. 

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies with transparent protocol-level addressing and immutable, unprunable blockchains can prove sender, receiver, and amounts of payments simply by pointing to the transaction in the blockchain.
Grin's privacy and scalability means users no longer have this ability. This prevents some merchants from accepting Grin due to the high possibility of payment disputes that are unresolvable in the same way they are for transparent coins.

This RFC changes the transaction building process where payers can require payees to create a "proof" they've received a payment before the payer finalizes and broadcasts the transaction.

# Community-level explanation
[community-level-explanation]: #community-level-explanation

From an end-user perspective, payers can require payees to prove receipt of funds as part of the transacting process.
Payers can then use these "proofs" to resolve payment disputes and prove they sent funds to the correct payee.

# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

## Slate changes

A new (optional) structure (`payment_info`) will be added to transaction slates, along with a version increase. The `payment_info` structure will contain:

* `sender_address` - An ed25519 public key generated by the sender.
* `receiver_address` - An ed25519 public key for the receiver, typically the public key of the user's v3 onion address.
* `receiver_signature` - A signature of the sender_address, received amount, and kernel commitment that validates against the `receiver_address`. 

## Generating proofs

Receipt confirmations (`receiver_signature`) will be generated by the payee by providing an ED25519 signature of: `(amount || kernel_commitment || sender_address)`, using the private key of the `receiver_address`.

The `sender_signature` can be generated for `(amount || kernel_commitment || sender_address)` using the private key of the `sender_address`.

Sender will then create and store the following info, which can be considered the complete `payment_proof`:

* `receiver_address`
* `receiver_signature`
* `amount`
* `kernel_commitment`
* `sender_address`
* `sender_signature`

## Verifying Proofs

This `payment_proof` can be provided by the sender at any time to convince a payee that a payment was made to them. The proof can be verified as follows:

1. Ensure the `kernel_commitment` is confirmed on-chain.
2. Verify that the `receiver_address` belongs to the payee.
3. Verify that the `receiver_signature` is valid.
4. Verify that the `sender_signature` is valid.

## Wallet actions
### init-send

As part of the first step of the tx-building process, the sender/payer generates the `sender_address` using their keychain. 

The `receiver_address` and keychain path of the `sender_address` must be stored locally, along with the `slate_id`.

The `sender_address` and `receiver_address` will then be added to the `payment_proof` structure of the slate.

### receive

If the `payment_proof` structure exists on the slate, it is mandatory that the `receiver_signature` is generated and added to the slate as part of the receive tx-building step.

### finalize

Using the `slate_id`, the sender can retrieve the original `sender_address` and `receiver_address` that were included in the slate, and verify that those fields remain unchanged. The sender must then validate the `receiver_signature`. If any of the original `payment_proof` slate fields were modified, or if the `receiver_signature` is invalid, the transaction must be rejected by the sender.

Once the `payment_info` details have been validated, the sender can generate and store the `payment_proof` (See `Generating Proofs` above), and then finalize the transaction as normal.

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

* Increases the size of tx slates.
* Possibility of privacy leakage through address reuse.

# Rationale and alternatives
[rationale-and-alternatives]: #rationale-and-alternatives

* This design works well with TOR tx building, yet is generic enough to work with all known transacting mechanisms.

# Prior art
[prior-art]: #prior-art

* Wallet713 implements payment proofs for grinbox transactions, which our design adapts and builds on to work more seemlessly with onion addresses and with transaction building methods that don't inherently rely on addresses.

# Unresolved questions
[unresolved-questions]: #unresolved-questions

* Can this be adapted to work for invoices?

# Future possibilities
[future-possibilities]: #future-possibilities

* Payment proofs could potentially be added to invoice payments in the future, but at the cost of an additional round of communication.

# References
[references]: #references

* Tx slate structure: https://github.com/mimblewimble/grin-wallet/blob/master/libwallet/src/slate.rs
* Beam's payment proof model: https://github.com/BeamMW/beam/blob/c9beb0eae55fa6b7fb3084ebe9b5db2850cf83b9/wallet/wallet_db.cpp#L3231-L3236
